All the White Spaces

Men go out into the void spaces of the world for various reasons. Some are actuated simply by a love of adventure, some have the keen thirst for scientific knowledge, and others again are drawn away from the trodden paths by the "lure of little voices," the mysterious fascination of the unknown.

 Ernest Shackleton, The Heart of the Antarctic

For anyone who's survived a Winter Journey

THE 1920 BRITISH COATS LAND EXPEDITION
James "Australis" Randall 	

leader

Liam Clarke
	

second-in-command
Christian Mortimer 	

captain
Jonny Wild 	

sailing master
Richard Boyd 	

first officer
Mark Nicholls 	

navigator
Dr. Alexander Staunton 	

surgeon
James Tarlington 	

chief scientific officer
David Laurence 	

first engineer/motor expert
Reginald Ollivar 	

second engineer/mountaineer
Howard Holmes 	

mountaineer
Bert Rees 	

carpenter
A. K. Duncan 	

dog master
Harry Cooper 	

dog master's assistant/"dogsbody"
Robert Macready 	

cook
Antonio ("Tony") Perry 	

able seaman
Ted Smith 	

able seaman
Martin Benham 	

able seaman
Louis Archer 	

able seaman
Bill Jones 	

able seaman
Victor Bedloe 	

storekeeper/seaman
George Ellis 	

stoker
Phil Parker 	

stoker
Jonathan Morgan 	

stowaway/"spare"

PORTSMOUTH, DECEMBER 1918

THE WAR HAD ENDED.

My mother had opened the Christmas jam, as if conscious she had been keeping it in reserve for nothing; the breakfast room smelled of quinces, damsons, and pine needles. Our maid Chloe turned the house into a perfect bower, bending branches over the mantelpieces, garlanding the stairs with ivy and bunching wreaths of holly around the photograph of my brothers. A sort of shrine had grown up in the front hall, where they stood resplendent in their brand-new uniforms. The patch of carpet in front of it was thready and uncertain from my mother's constant pacing, echoed in the burnish to the sides of the photograph frame, too often picked up and set down.

The telegram the telegram that changed everything had arrived early, the boy ringing the doorbell and cycling away without waiting for a reply.

My mother summoned me to her too-hot, too-fussy, floral-scented sanctuary in the morning room. I stood awkwardly at the door in my long, scuffed boots as she flitted around a table heaving with poinsettia. She didn't look at me.

"I know I'm being silly Jo," she said, slender fingers wrapped around the little envelope. "It's probably just news they must be well on their way to the coast by now. We'll have them back for Christmas!"

The shortened name sounded wrong in her mouth; she was using it to jolly me along. Unlike my brothers, my mother normally insisted on my full name, which I hated.

I swallowed, and didn't trust myself to reply. The War had ended, but Rufus and Francis were still in France, incapacitated by their wounds. Their best friend, Harry, had already sent me a letter uncensored about the horrors of the Casualty Clearing Station. I'd hidden it from my parents in the biscuit tin under my bed. Partly because they didn't like Harry writing to me, it wasn't appropriate; but mostly because it was so stark and unflinching. Harry had never learned to dissemble.

A week ago my brothers should have been fit for repatriation, put on an ambulance train for the long journey to the coast, Blighty beyond. I'd worried, of course, but small worries, tame ones. Whether they'd have enough blankets, or if Rufus was being rude to the nurses. He had a temper on him.

We were unlikely to get them back as we'd known them, although that hadn't quite sunk in yet. Their wounds were terrible septic, Harry had written, badly septic, from the thick mud of the battlefield.

"It's probably just their arrival date." Hovering, she still didn't open the envelope. It wasn't a thick envelope contained only a single sheet of paper. But a horrible clawing sensation rose up in my throat as I considered what news that single sheet might hold.

"Sit down," I said, and she did so with a little sigh. I would do no such thing myself not on the satin chaise, nor the dainty antique armchair but I crossed the room, boots muffled by the thick carpet, to stand over her writing desk. Her lily-of-the-valley scent was stronger there, making my breakfast turn in my stomach. A short glance to the clock above the mantelpiece. The sun was still struggling to come over the rosebushes, and Father, as usual, was absent: he wouldn't be back until long after winter dark.

We looked at the envelope together for a long, long time.

She reached behind and crept her hand into mine. It was the first time she'd done so without remarking how blunt my fingers were, how I bit my nails savagely. Unbecoming.

I thought of Harry's description of their last engagement: the long quiet stealing over the battlefield when the guns stopped. The smoke billowing over the riverbanks, Harry lying in the mud with his binoculars, not daring to breathe, making terrible bargains. A man could suffer a dreadful wound it could blow clean through him, painting his insides onto the dirt and stay silent. He might not even notice how badly he was wounded.

"Here." My voice sounded rough. "If you won't." I took the envelope. Her shoulders sagged, and I realised she'd been waiting all along for me to do it: for one of us to be brave.

I didn't want to open it, but set my jaw and fumbled with her delicate little letter opener as though my hands were icy cold. I saw the familiar form, my eyes jumping ahead without me, picking out the handwritten words and sentences:

Deeply regret to inform you that 

I felt a wave crashing over me. The ordinary sounds of the household were suddenly far away: Chloe, humming to herself as she swept the back hallway; the birds scratching in the chimneys; the faint growl of a motorcar going by. The ice had spread to my face and mouth, and I could no more speak than I could breathe underwater.

"Oh," my mother said. "Not the boys, not them "

The Army Council express their sympathy 

I dropped the piece of paper so few words, so many blank spaces onto her desk.

Although I'd lain sleepless for several weeks with my eyes fixed on the ceiling, imagining maps of the Hindenburg Line marching across the plasterwork, I hadn't understood how very far away Rufus and Francis really were. They always felt just around the corner, as if they'd stepped into the next room. But they had been miles and miles away, dying of their wounds.

I had been at home, when I'd so desperately wished to go with them. I'd been at home, while they 

Both always did their duty 

With some difficulty, I realised I was starting to cry. I scrubbed my eyes furiously with the back of my hand. My mother was still looking at me: I had refused to cry in front of her or Father since I was very little.

"I'm sorry," I said, and my voice was so thick and deep I barely recognised it. "I'm sorry, I'm so sorry."

I put my hand on her shoulder. She was warm, and I could feel her birdlike bones through the fabric. She slapped me away with such force it rang across the room. The telegram lay on the floor.

Died of their wounds without suffering 

They had died together. That is to say they'd died the same night. They would have wanted it that way. Together in all things. Their bedroom had been cleaned and aired for their homecoming, and in my long nights of half-waking sometimes I thought I heard familiar sounds: the creak of mattress springs as they told ghost stories by moonlight or traced expedition routes on the atlas. On clear summer nights they would sneak out into town, leaving the windows open and bodies made of empty clothing in their beds, coming back for breakfast with tales of adventure, dragging Harry apologetically in their wake.

They would not come back again. The vicious hurt of it grabbed me around the chest and made me stagger away from the desk like a drunk.

"I should go " I said, my voice finally breaking. "I should fetch Father "

"No." Tight, quivering, almost another slap. "Go to your room."

She didn't look at me.

I reeled out into the dark hallway, grabbing at the door handles, levering myself down the corridor until I was in the water closet, throwing up my eggs and bacon into the sink. I braced myself against the porcelain and shuddered, wiping the sweat off my face and loosening the stiff fabric of my day dress around my neck. It was normally my favourite, the plainest and most masculine one I had: it did up tight like a shirt collar, revealing no expanse of pale skin.

Our house was large enough that I could wander in a daze through carpeted corridors and narrow tiled passageways. I passed Chloe, peeping out of the kitchen door like an apparition, and it seemed to take an age to climb the back staircase, one step at a time; my boots dragging on the tread; my layers of flannel and velveteen weighing me down like lead. Everything once familiar was strange. I felt as if I were opening doors at random. But suddenly I was in my brothers' room.

They'd insisted on sharing: of course they had. Their room took up the entire length of the first floor; faced the harbour, across the blur of December fog and half-empty streets. They could look out and see the sea, the distance and the sea, while I had to be content with a small patch of garden wall and my mother's magnolia. I heaved the sash window up with a judder, the movement making the tight little buttons at my cuffs bite into my skin. I wasn't expected to raise my arms above my head I was expected to be satisfied with convention, even when it pained me. I stared out. The wind whipped at my raw cheeks where unchecked tears had dried.

I took a long, shivering breath, bracing myself against the windowsill.

Not the boys.

I tried not to think about my brothers lying under that stinking dirty foreign soil, the same soil that had stopped their hearts. They'd sent letters at first I'd found them funny about staying in dusty little French farmhouses, making friends with the locals. About long marches through blasted fields, and the terrible food in the trenches. They'd continued to joke affectionately: telling us it was all a game, and one they intended to win. But when Harry's letters started arriving on my doorstep in their green envelopes, apologising for the presumption he needed to tell someone they had a very different tone.

Duty, and sacrifice. And horrors.

I turned slowly. Dark wallpaper, grey and burgundy, a stark contrast to my own room: chintz and lace and all the things I hated; all the things that had been chosen for me. My brothers' bedroom was as neat and businesslike as a hospital ward. Blankets tucked in at perfect right angles, unfilled water carafes on the nightstand, sparkling in the pale sunlight like cut ice. Combs and Brilliantine lined up on the dressing table, programmes for social dances tucked into the corners of the mirror. The long north wall was covered entirely with maps. Sea charts. Newspaper cuttings.

I wiped my mouth, and stared across at the perfect jagged ball of Antarctica. Its unfinished edges and tints of pale blue dominated the room entirely: for as long as I could remember, the South Pole had been the centre of everything. I could almost see fingerprints on the glass, ghostly traces, where fingers had slid their way down from the Weddell Sea. Of course Chloe would have wiped it clean by now.

"That's where we'll land," Rufus had said, tapping a finger against his lips. "Vahsel Bay. Base camp. Then the sledging parties off the maps and straight to the centre."

"You'd better hope there's nothing in the way," Harry said from behind him Harry's allotted place and Rufus raised an eyebrow.

"There won't be. Old Australis knows what he's doing."

From the newspaper clippings, James "Australis" Randall stared down at me, handsome and commanding. He was broke nearly bankrupt but insisted he had to try, again and again, for the South Pole, despite the accident that had swooped him off the deck of his ship, crushed him in the freezing water against the hidden terrible faces of an iceberg, left him battling for his life on a floe in thirty degrees of frost. I wondered what it would be like to die from such intense cold. "I imagine it'd be rather like falling asleep," Francis had replied, and squeezed my shoulder. "Not so bad."

Randall's accident had been in the Weddell Sea, that treacherous and deadly expanse of water, churning with pack ice, which blocked the route from the islands of South Georgia down to the Antarctic continent. When he'd returned, he'd tried the ice from another angle, where Liam Clarke had lost his fingers on the pitiless Great Ice Barrier had refused point-blank to speak to the papers about it saying that a man was entitled to leave the past behind.

I knew their stories so well.

And I could see traces of my brothers in the impatient choppy edges of each clipping my mother's dressmaking scissors, borrowed and blunted and never returned. I could see them in each pin jammed into the wallpaper my mother's violent disapproval, and Rufus's smile behind her back. "Maybe we'll take you with us," he'd say to me, half serious, half joking, eyes fixed keenly on mine to observe my reaction. "Would you like that?"

"Don't tease," Francis would whisper in reply.

I'd loved him for it, and longed to follow them but knew I never would. My war-hero brothers, off on their adventure to the great white continent: I could almost see them now. Invincible; laughing; triumphant. Leaving me behind again.

A half-sob. I buried my face in my hands, stretching my fingers wide, pressing into my flesh, trying to mould myself into someone different; someone who wasn't about to cry. Someone more like my brothers.

More like the man I knew I should have been.

I couldn't bear the thought of returning to my own room: cloying, stifling, as rigid as the tock-tock-tock of the metronome beating time during my endless piano lessons. The only thing in there which was mine really mine was shoved under the bed, hidden from Chloe and my mother as if it contained a hand grenade. But it was just a Crawford's digestive biscuit tin; a nude, tautly muscled Grecian discus thrower was stamped on the front. The tin guarded my greatest treasures: the fat bundle of letters from Harry serving as my lifeline to the Front and a grey woollen armband with a crudely stitched crown. Someone had dropped it on the street outside the recruiting station, in the early days of the big Derby enlistment drive. The army posters had stared down at me as I'd picked it up, slipped it into my pocket. It was given in return for pledging to serve: I couldn't believe anyone would treat something so precious so slightly.

Sometimes I'd try that armband on, see how it looked on me. I'd prop the biscuit tin in front of my mirror and stare at it. Then bury it back under my bed, with all its contents, shoving it out of sight.

I swallowed another sob. Not the boys.

A rustling. The wind came sneaking in like a thief, fluttering the curtains, toying with the newspaper clippings. The movement sent an unexpected shiver from the nape of my neck right down my spine. The fog made it dark for a December morning, so dark, and for a moment I could feel myself being watched by someone something just out of reach.

It was so quiet in the house I could have heard a hairpin drop.

I felt sure that if I removed my hands from my eyes, I would find someone else in the room. No two someones, standing tall and straight with their backs to me. Hair neatly combed, uniforms pressed. Handsome faces still turned up towards Antarctica.

But Harry had been straightforward, hadn't spared me the details. While the shrapnel had mostly spared their faces (mostly), it was clear no one would be calling them handsome any more. I thought about the ragged tearing of barbed wire, razor sharp on their tender skin, the mud, the mud, a chaos of shouts and screams and falling rain, the agonies of the men, and in the sudden darkness of the morning 

I opened my fingers, looked around the room. Breathed out. No one was there.

I gulped. I would have done anything to see them again, and it yawned beneath me like a crevasse in that quiet room. It opened up and swallowed me whole.

I knew where I'd find them.

My shoulders shaking, I heaved the window wider. I hung half out of it, a strand of stray hair plastering itself to my face in the pale, wet air. The fog was so thick I could hardly see the street, let alone the harbour, but I could hear the tide in the distance. The long, quiet pull of the sea, breathing itself back and forth against the shore, regular and composed as a sleeping giant.

It seemed wrong fatally wrong for it to be so calm. There should have been a storm. Wind lashing at my hair. Waves rushing forwards like dark battalions. The room seemed to lurch around me, like a gale in southern waters, and I clung on.

My brothers had left me behind. I'd hug their memories to my chest; I'd fix them forever in that photograph in our hallway. Rufus, looking straight at the camera with his tiger smile; Francis, a little more reserved, standing to one side. The studio walls were creamy white, and the frame gilded, but they didn't belong in it no more than I belonged in this polite little floral world. They belonged outside, with a wider prospect, the sea stretching off into the distance. The endless washy horizon.

But now my brothers would never see Antarctica. Never know a clear day on the South Atlantic, or the jewelled ice of the floes. Their dreams had come to nothing, but I was the last Morgan sibling, and I knew where I'd find them.

I knew where I had to go.

The sea should have risen up. There should have been a tempest, a typhoon, a tidal wave. Crashing over the quay, breaking over me making me anew.

Because I heard it then: the call of the South. I could hear my brothers.

Maybe we'll take you with us.

1
THE FORTITUDE

THE FORTITUDE, AUSTRAL SPRING 1919

THE STORAGE LOCKER WAS CRAMPED AND NOISY.

When my candle guttered to its end, smoke curling inside the blackened panes of the trench lantern, I felt I'd been nailed into my own coffin. Rattling and shaking, the expedition's provisions strained at their lashings and tried to pry themselves loose. With sickening lurches, my stomach plummeting, the Fortitude made her way through the South Atlantic Ocean. It was more than I could bear: the all-consuming dark, the confinement, the need to hide. It felt like I'd hidden too long altogether.

I slept under a pile of blankets and tarpaulins: if the crew looked in, I'd be another sack of flour in the flickering light. The blankets were coarse, shot through with little knots and burrs, probably dirty but I hardly cared. My jumper, a sober burnt green with two polished buttons at the collar, had been picked up on shore in South America; it already made me look like a vagabond. Nothing would be "kept for best" ever again. All the clothing Harry had bought for me, piece by piece until I had an entirely masculine wardrobe it would be worn to destruction.

My pillows were sacks of dog food, making my cropped hair smell like a rendering house, but at least that dog food gave Harry an excuse to visit. Without him, there was nothing but crushing black, under the weight of all the decks and staircases: no food, no water, no candle. I was as dependent as a newborn child.

I drank in, greedily, glimpses of the Fortitude whenever he opened the locker door: I'd seen her only in the dark, head down and face covered. Stowing away, my heart in my throat. We'd paid the Argentine nightwatchman all the money we had left, and there wasn't a soul to be seen as we came aboard at Buenos Aires, rain seething off the deck like water coming to the boil.

It felt like an age ago, a dark frustrating age, and I longed to see the Fortitude properly. I'd whiled away long, lonely hours with nothing but my own thoughts; sometimes listening to the men clattering around in the galley, learning scandalous things things I'd never even imagined, making my cheeks hot about the women they'd left behind. I'd wished powerfully instead for the easy, idle chatter of Rufus and Francis, talking between themselves. But no matter how hard I longed for them, they weren't there.

Harry was my only companion. Just turned twenty-one, he seemed infinitely older than when we'd left England; although he'd kept his smart officer's moustache, his curly hair was becoming wild. He was a long way from the young man I'd met at Portsmouth harbour on that dull January day of the new peace; my mother shut away in her morning room, the house dimmed and shadowy. In the pinprick rain, I'd found Harry Cooper, unexpected stepping out from behind a lamp post as if he'd been there all along. His face was unfamiliar; it had blurred in my memory, while my brothers' faces stayed fresh although they might as well have been side by side in the same photograph frame. Despite the fact that we'd never passed a minute alone together, I knew Harry well, all his half-articulated doubts and fears. I just need to tell someone. Duty, and sacrifice and men hanging on the barbed wire, worried by crows.

He'd said: "I wasn't sure if you'd want to see me" as if we'd quarrelled and he thought I might hold a grudge. I'd embraced him in the street, where anyone might see, and for a moment he'd gone limp in my arms.

I'd known, then, that I could talk him into anything.

But the further we sailed, the more reluctant he seemed. We argued, quietly, by candlelight.

"Can you believe we've got away with it?" I almost forgot to keep my voice down it burst out of me. Harry smiled, an overcast smile that made his eyes seem warm and steadfast.

"Not quite not yet." He twisted his shirt around his wrists. "Look, Jo "

"Jonathan," I said. "You need to get used to it "

"Jonathan," he said, giving me an unhappy glance. "I don't know. We'll be at South Georgia soon. What if there's a telegram what if they've found us?"

I scoffed, although the prospect made my heart beat faster. We'd been lucky to get to Dover and then to the Continent without being stopped. A daring scribble on Harry's passport had served to admit me posing uncomfortably as his wife as if I were only half a person. I'd known where I could find my brothers, felt it in my bones: if my parents had also put the pieces together, the two of us disappearing while the Fortitude sailed for the South Pole a line from them could still spell disaster.

"What if Randall decides to throw you off? Then you'd be in trouble, stuck on a whaling station, with with old soldiers and Norwegian criminals, until you could arrange passage home. It's not a place for you not without me "

It would still be southern waters. And if I'd stowed away on one ship, I thought recklessly, then what was another? It must have showed on my face, because he grabbed my arm. "Jonathan, please. You don't understand what kind of men they are. It's too dangerous!"

"What, then? I stay locked up in here until we make the Weddell Sea?"

"No, but "

"Until we drop anchor? Until the sledging parties set out for the Pole, and we can be sure no one's after us? Harry we're in this together. You promised." My voice sounded shrill, and I hated it.

He sighed. "I know, I know. But they'd have wanted me to look out for you." He sat wedged between two packing crates, long legs drawn up to his chin. In the shadows cast by the trench lantern, his brown eyes were almost black. I knew I must look ghostly by comparison: short straw-coloured hair and pale eyes, pale skin grimy from the locker floor. A pause. He clasped his arms around his knees, allowing me to see a fresh scar on his hand, curled around the base of his thumb like a comma. I nodded at it.

"Oh the dogs." He smiled a little. "They're brutes. They don't like me, or their kennels, or the motion of the ship. They fight constantly. Duncan has a technique for separating them "

I felt I could guess what it was, but raised my eyebrows anyway.

"An absolute haymaker to the jaw of the bigger dog." Harry's laugh appeared to startle him. "Can you imagine? Shouting, ‘Come on, you bastard.' He says we need to show them who's boss or else they'll walk all over us."

I couldn't imagine Harry doing anything similar. Seeing my sceptical look, he shook his head. "Don't worry. I couldn't stomach it. So when Lurcher and Biter were fighting, I threw a whole bucket of water over them they let each other go pretty quickly. And not a peep out of them for the next few minutes, they looked so affronted."

I snorted. I could picture it: the sun on deck, glimmering off the freezing water; two stunned and bedraggled dogs fixing Harry with looks of canine hate.

"The men thought it was hilarious. But the bucket was meant to be holding scientific specimens, so I got it in the neck. Plankton, apparently!"

There was a happy lightness to his voice. Harry had been an outsider to the ship's crew, having not sailed with her from England: how could he, when I'd needed him so much on the way down. I should be glad he was finding his feet should be grateful, because so much still depended on it. But as I looked at him in the flickering light, my hands and knees all dusty, my limbs cramped, it couldn't help feeling like a slap in the face. I didn't want to hear about his daily life on the ship, not while I was confined. His eyes lighting up as he told me about mugs of hot cocoa on the fo'c'sle, trading nods with the officer of the watch. Beating his disagreeable bunkmate the guardian of that bucket of plankton in the chess tournament. Restraining the sledge dogs as they strained madly at their leashes, trying with enthusiasm and effort to pitch themselves off the ship. I bit my lip and drummed my fingers, trying to resist the urge to lash out at him. It wasn't Harry's fault, I told myself. He was just doing what we'd agreed.

But it felt like I'd already been left behind. "Honestly, you're safer down here for now," he added, as if he could tell what I was thinking. "The sea's getting much worse. That big squall at dawn? We were taken aback, and I nearly went overboard some of the dogs, too." The smile slid off his face. "We might have been swept straight over the railings."

His horror was plain and justified. Even if the Fortitude hadn't been scudding along at nine knots under sail, I still didn't think Harry could swim, despite growing up beside the sea. My brothers had summers of leisure and idleness, trailing saltwater and sand into the house; the Morgans weren't expected to concern themselves with how the majority earned a living. But Harry was different: even though the Coopers had come up in the world, their fortune was still newly minted. He was encouraged to spend his holidays learning about warehouses and shipping and stevedores Rufus and Francis were impossibly glamorous by comparison. Trade, Rufus had teased him and later, when Harry had earned his commission, temporary gentleman bowing and scraping and tipping an imaginary cap. Harry, though, had always laughed; had always given as good as he got.

He started to explain, seeing that he'd successfully distracted me from whatever complaint I'd been about to make. The sub-Antarctic Ocean was home to the roughest seas known to man; they had champed their jaws around the Fortitude, and forced her nearly over on her beam ends. Down in the locker, I'd had to wedge myself, breathless, between the splintery shelves, fighting nausea as everything swung around me. Up on deck, though, the rigging had shimmered with movement; Randall had openly cursed the ship's captain, roared loud enough to be heard over the weather; it had nearly come to blows.

"What was he like?" I asked for the hundredth time. I could hardly bear the thought that I was aboard the expeditionary ship of "Australis" Randall, more legend than man. Harry, too, had been overawed to meet him; attending his appointment at the expedition office in London, the men from my brothers' newspaper cuttings had come vividly and aggressively to life. But he needn't have worried: Randall had taken his cash given him a careless once-over, asked a few searching questions about his service history and said: "Well, if you can get yourself to Buenos Aires by December, meet me there I might well find a place for you."

"Fearsome, I suppose." I could see in the set of Harry's shoulders, the way he tried to straighten his cuffs, that Randall wasn't quite as he'd expected him to be.

"Harry." I put a hand on his shoulder, trying to choke down my impatience. "You know I'll be found, sooner or later. We need to go to him before that happens!"

He sighed. "I know. It's just " He waved his hands, as if to convey the ship: the whole vast world of it outside my prison. From mast to mast, all the rooms and cabins and decks and kennels and dogs and boats that I'd barely seen and then only in darkness. He had another bite mark on his left hand, surrounded by sickly green bruising. I envied him even that.

He didn't want to admit he was frightened of Randall. But I didn't fear him, or his infamous rages. He could have me flogged, or confined, or turn me off at South Georgia, leave me to the whalers. After three days of darkness, I didn't care as long as I could stand on deck and take a breath of good clean air. See the horizon. Close my eyes and feel the rain on my face. Free.

The South Atlantic; my brothers would have liked that.


HARRY WAS DELIVERED BY THE SHIP'S BELL: HE scrambled gratefully out of the locker, leaving me alone with my thoughts and the luxury of a new candle for the lantern. I stared at my shadow, thrown against the shelves and boxes. HP sauce; Keiller's orange marmalade; Tate and Lyle. Just like our pantry at home if our pantry frequently turned itself upside down. But my shadow was different here.

The sea grew rougher and rougher over the course of the morning, until with queasy stomach I could hear a great commotion above me, the sound of countless men on deck. Muffled shouting. A moment later the ship shuddered, as if it had been stabbed, the ground dropping away.

It was a bad fall: too sudden to brace myself, and the bulkhead smacked the wind out of me. I was sure I'd cried out. A small, shameful noise, making familiar bitterness rush through me. I paused on the floor, panting slightly. Listening.

A creaking sound from the deck above. Life went on. It would be a whole day of darkness until Harry returned. I heard the pounding of my heartbeat in my ears, felt the sweat gathering at the nape of my neck. I was locked in the bowels of a ship crossing the most unsettled seas on the globe, only one person aware of my presence. If I was thrown too hard to the floor knocked out I knew people could die unattended from such an injury. And should the lantern turn over: "We're at the bottom of a three-mast tinder pile," Harry had warned. "Be careful."

I loosened the scarf from around my neck, telling myself this was my great adventure: the last Morgan sibling was heading South. My face was far too young for my liking, but I was tall for my age, carried some weight to my limbs; thought I might pass for a boy of eighteen. On our journey down, Harry had got hold of a pair of scissors and hacked my hair down to my scalp then laughed with me as I'd scrabbled for the mirror to admire myself from all angles. "I don't think I'd be recognised," I'd said, hushed. "Even if they'd worked it out, wired the British Embassy " and the thought had clanged around in my head like a stone in a tin can as I stared at the discarded locks on the floor. I could feel the packet ship surging and heaving against the waves, and pressed my hands into fists by my side, willing it to go faster: willing it to fly down the coast of South America to meet the Fortitude, before anything could overtake us.

That night, he'd agreed to finally start using Jo, which was what my brothers had always called me; could possibly be mistaken for Joe if overheard. But that was strictly for when we were alone. Elsewhere, I'd be Jonathan, and I turned it around in my mouth, liking the sound of it, the way something fell into place within me resounding, deep with those three syllables.

Somehow it described me perfectly.

The last Morgan sibling.

I crawled over to the locker door, hung up my sweaty scarf on a loose nail, and sat back on my haunches to stare at it this one small bit of home. A bright crimson fabric, soft and bold together, it had once belonged to Francis. I remembered that day at the beach a blustery April day, before the War had torn them away from me. Francis had been sitting in a deck chair, struggling to read a paperback, trying to ignore Rufus nearly a year his senior gently harassing girls on the promenade. The breeze had plucked at my parasol as if it wanted to lift me up and carry me away; Francis's scarf unravelled itself, scudding away along the sand. Laughing, I'd kicked off my shoes and chased it along the shoreline in damp stockings.

Rufus hadn't looked up; my mother had pursed her lips. I was five years younger than the boys, but already expected to behave myself. Francis, though, had pressed the scarf back into my hands with a smile so wide his dimples showed. "Here, Jo. You'd better look after this for me."

But in the shadows the crimson fabric looked like blood; the hours of darkness wore on, every movement on the deck above me like a gunshot.

I was alone. But I wouldn't be forgotten or left behind. I wouldn't.

I sat up when the ship's bell rang for Sunday service, prompting a stampede of a great many boots on a great many stairs; I was surprised what a relief it was to hear these outside sounds, and the faint melody of hymns. Eternal Father, Strong to Save. Whose arm does bind the restless wave?

Afterwards, voices in the galley gave me a small measure of company and nerves, as I held my breath. From their way of speaking, I guessed these were Randall's officers. I could hear the scrape of wood, a muffled curse as the ship moved suddenly. A clattering of metal utensils.

Someone let out a low whistle. "Old Australis on fine form today?" An Australian accent, all upturned sentences. I'd heard him berating Harry for dawdling. Duncan, our dog handler: determined to find fault with everything, particularly a soft English boy with more money than sense.

A snort. A deeper voice. "It's been doom and gloom with Randall recently, hasn't it? If it's not Job it's Psalms. In their peril their courage melted away, indeed."

"He must have been quite a peril in the lines a peril to his own men, too, from what I've heard. I'm sure you could tell a few tales, Nicholls?"

"Not really my thing," a third voice said, rather absently. "Do you know where Macready keeps "

"Don't see why the cook should get an afternoon off," Duncan said snidely. "And we all have to muck in, when we've got jobs to do." To emphasise the point, the deck rocked, causing another crash of falling pots and pans.

The mention of Randall had drawn me in like a fish on a hook, and I'd crept closer to the locker door, pressing my ear against it. I thought about Harry's reluctance to face him, to own up to what he'd done, sneaking me aboard: a reluctance that couldn't help seem unmanly. I was sure so sure Randall would understand.

"I don't know what he's trying to do," said the doom-and-gloom man. "Having a fucking conchie pardon my language, Nicholls doing the reading. It's a smack in the face even having one of those cowards on board. Equality of sacrifice means nothing. The men don't like it "

"He did his time," Nicholls said, a little sharper, in a way that conveyed he was uninterested in hearing anything further. "Same as the rest of us."

"Should've shot that lot at dawn, if you ask me, rather than giving them nice cosy cells "

"Oh, shut up, Boyd "

There was another crash, the sound of the galley door swinging wide on its hinges, and the Scottish tones of the ship's cook saying, "Made a meal of it, have we, lads?"

The voices died away.

But much later, at a time not determined by bell or dinner or Harry, the galley door opened again, making me freeze under my blankets. I thought those officers had returned to continue debating the Sunday service in private although why the crew should contain a conchie, a conscientious objector, was beyond me. The very lowest of the low. Should've shot that lot at dawn; I'd heard Boyd's opinion, brutal as it was, so often from my brothers that I barely even questioned it. But there was absolute silence, and I let out a long and shuddering breath.

Then the bolts rattled on the locker door.

I extinguished the lantern, pulled the blankets entirely over me, backing away; tried to breathe quietly, but my breath wanted to escape in great gasps, heart jumping around in my chest.

The locker door creaked open. There was a breeze, faint and steam-scented, blowing in from the world beyond. A soft thudding of floorboards as someone stood in the doorway. I put my hand over my mouth, stifling the childish instinct to call out, "Who's there?"

Whoever it was, they stayed very quiet. I could see the faint glow of a light being held up this way and that. I closed my eyes, willing it to go away. Not like this. I wasn't ready. Not like this.

The ship stopped swaying for a moment, as if holding its breath.

Then the light vanished, and I was alone again.


MY CANDLE BURNED DOWN; THE DARKNESS WAS INFINITE, like being buried alive. I strained my eyes trying to make out shapes in the gloom. From my corner, the sacks and barrels and crates loomed seemed to have grown bigger. Three sacks piled on top of one another made a crouching, rounded figure. The ends of barrels, stacked side-by-side on an upper shelf, were a pale row of moonlike faces, flat and expressionless save for their scribbled-ink mouths.

Shapes in the darkness. Somehow watchful. I shuddered.

The Antarctic night would be far worse. In April the sun would set for the last time, and we would spend months in a freezing dark unlike anything else on earth; the ice would be a desolate place, ruled by shadows. I'd read descriptions of the overwinter, which I'd once childishly interpreted as the worst winter possible. I hadn't been far off. Men went mad under the weight of that relentless dark. Melancholy and paranoia. Hoarding guns, before turning them on their companions or themselves. It could happen to anyone; man wasn't adapted to deal with the total absence of light.

The faces looked down on me, and I shuddered, thinking of the ceaseless moaning of winds over the ice.

I pressed myself against the far wall, finding my eyes drawn to the nail where Francis's scarf still hung. But it wasn't comforting its half-glimpsed shape seemed to creep away into the gloom, as if it didn't want to be seen. Not a speck of that bright crimson colour survived. I swallowed.

Five days alone: maybe I'd started imagining things. It was impossible to believe that there were men out there, and daylight. Maybe I hadn't seen someone opening the locker door.

Maybe this inky blackness was all there was.

I stared into the darkness, fascinated by the long shape suggested by the scarf, and my heart thudded painfully. We'd lived in a coastal town, under lighting restrictions, the shadow of airship raids along the South Downs. My brothers would only ever have two days three days of leave, and be gone again; I'd been so embarrassed to show my childish fear of the pitch-dark house. But when they were home on nights with bad weather, the boom of thunder like guns in the distance, Francis would come to check on me; would linger half-seen, half-sensed, in my open doorway. "It's all right, Jo." Only by moonlight might I make out a glimmer of red hair, his shadow thrown over the floorboards. He knew how I hated the dark.

The faint swish of the scarf; a chill breath of air. I pressed my hands to my face, feeling the bones under the skin. I thought how I must have appeared to Harry when he'd opened the door someone composed of flickers of light and shadow. Half-made. And the locker not a tomb, but an in-between place. Like my brothers, forgotten while others came home. Not quite alive and not quite dead.

"The other country," the clergyman had said at their funeral. I felt myself in it now.

In a scuffle of shaky movement, I grabbed the scarf and wound it around my neck; that tall half-glimpsed shape disappeared. I put my head under the blankets. My breath steamed up the thick fabric, making it sodden and unpleasant.

I must have fallen into slumber, because I dreamed Francis was standing in the doorway, bringing me a candle: my room didn't face the sea, I was (technically) allowed the light, but Father had better not find out. I could almost hear my father's voice, distant and authoritarian: "in this house we all play our part." There could be no accommodation made. My brother, though, was trying to tell me something, his voice muddled with the sounds of the Antarctic wind.

A whistling. A howling. Getting louder, louder 

Louder 

The locker door was open again. Clear golden light streamed in, washed over my face. My blankets were off. I screwed up my eyes. A kettle on the galley stove, coming up to the boil, made a low trumpeting sound like hunting horns in the distance.

There wasn't enough air: I was drowning. I'd been discovered.

Someone was holding my arms, speaking to me in a low harsh voice. I caught a confusing impression of sharp dark blue eyes and neatly parted fox-red hair. There was a strange white patch in my vision, exploding outwards. Then darkness spun towards me.


I CAME TO MY SENSES WITH MY HEAD RESTING ON A TEA towel that smelled of dish soap. The galley was crowded and steamy. Sweat trickled down my spine; I was still wearing my layers of woollen clothing, and my collar remained buttoned, hadn't been loosened to give me air to display my smooth and narrow neck. Good. Harry must have seen to that.

Raising my eyes slowly, I could see that the cook Macready, a small, compact man had rolled up his jumper sleeves in the fierce heat of the stove. His hair was shaved close enough to expose scars on his scalp.

"You were a terrible liar," he said to Harry, without malice. "Next time you pretend your lantern and dinner have fallen overboard, remember that Randall could and would throw you overboard too, the mood he's been in."

Harry flushed, bending his head.

"But him, though? Childhood friend or not, Cooper "

"He's nearly nineteen," Harry said. I blinked, knowing I looked younger. I could see we'd got this far on luck rather than Harry's judgment.

"Randall wanted men," Macready said. "Aged twenty to thirty-five. With experience, and you squeaked on board with little of that yourself." His gaze settled on me, and he frowned: I attempted a watery smile. "We haven't met," he said, not exactly unkindly. "But I understand you're Jonathan Morgan."

It rang in my ears, Jonathan Morgan, the enormity of it hitting me.

"Yes," I said, and stumbled through my how-do-you-dos.

He narrowed his eyes, turning back to the stove. A cast-iron monster, it took up one entire wall; the rest of the room was filled to heaving with buckets and pans and shelves and swinging lanterns. Hatches in the ceiling let in a beautiful pale light.

"I shouldn't have left you in there." Harry's fingers twitched; it looked like he wanted to take my hand.

"You'd better eat something proper, after all that," Macready said, putting a bowl of porridge on the table before me. I stared as if I'd never seen food before, taken aback by the rich burnt-sugar smell of Golden Syrup, the condensed milk pooling around the sides. The bowl was chipped enamel. Sweat dripped down my back. The food looked like something from a million miles away.

Suddenly, I was all the way awake. I knew fully where I was. The Fortitude.

I tried to stand, pushing the bowl aside. Randall. I'd expected to be hauled in front of him by the scruff of my neck, like a disobedient child. My knees caught the table and I looked around, wildly, as I steadied myself. It was surely time. But the galley door, up a flight of steps, was shut firmly against the outside world. The pot on the stove made a slurping sound as it simmered. The oven let off an uncompromising dry heat. Garlands of onions bobbed from the beams. An oddly domestic scene.

Perched on the other chair, the fourth and silent member of our little group made a steeple with his fingertips in front of his wide, sarcastic-looking mouth. His fingerless gloves were pulled all the way up to his elbows, despite the heat, and I could see now that his waxed hair was more ginger than red. He looked at me as if I were a perplexing natural phenomenon.

"Easy." Macready pushed me back with one hand, gentling me like a skittish animal. "You want to get something down you. Randall will send for you shortly, and you'll need to be in the pink. I don't ever think I've seen him so furious like a bear who's stepped on a hornet's nest. And as for this one" he indicated Harry "well, no one has had the sheer nerve to surprise him like this before. Cash or not. There'll be hell to pay."

"That's not particularly helpful," Harry said quietly, but I could see he was stung at the prospect, and Macready's casually ominous tone. He was used to being liked by his superiors.

It all felt like a terrible ill omen: my first encounter with the rest of the expedition had me swooning, like in a railway paperback. I needed to stand up from now on. I started shovelling porridge into my mouth: it was immeasurably good. The redhead turned up his nose.

Macready shrugged expressively at Harry. "It doesn't do Morgan here" Morgan, just my last name, like I was another one of the men, making me swallow too fast and cough into the back of my hand "any good to sugarcoat it. There's a great many you've made look like fools anyone so much as breathes in Randall's general direction, Clarke knows about it, and Boyd's been itching to take our poor progress out on someone. Randall, though this is his ship, his expedition, and we're almost too late to make our landing, and now you pop up? Like a bloody bear, indeed."

Randall. He'd designed the Fortitude himself, down to the last rivet: named for his family motto, built in Norway for ice endurance. The crushing pack and the terrible swell. We'd all devoured the accounts of his previous expeditions. He would insist on staying at the wheel, without a waterproof, in the highest seas soaked quite through, as if listening to the ocean with his skin. This was his world, and I'd stepped through the newspaper pages and dropped headfirst into it.

"I don't mind," I said quickly, Morgan still ringing around my head, clear as a bell. "The shouting. He has every right to be furious. What I've done is "

"Pretty bold," Macready said, with a little quirk of his mouth.

"Absolutely ridiculous," said the stranger with the ginger hair. His raspy voice belonged to someone who smoked feverishly, and he gave me a long, cool look. "Stark raving madness, that you should think you could just hop aboard a Pole-bound vessel, like some sort of preposterous Boy's Own adventure. You know you could mean the difference between success and failure for us now? Randall doesn't carry spares, and we're short enough as it is. If you take another man's rations, or fall ill which doesn't look out of the question on your showing so far you'll be risking all our lives."

Macready shook his head, gave my shoulder a brief squeeze. I noticed he didn't rush to disagree.

"I doubt you'd care," Harry muttered. "On your showing so far. What were you doing in the locker, anyway?"

The stranger snorted. "Cooper. Mind your own business."

Harry flushed. The redhead gave him a look of great disgust, pushing his chair back from the table. "I hope you enjoy your porridge, Morgan," he said, taking the stairs two at a time. "Get a hot meal in you. Randall shall be putting you off on the first rock he sees."

"Oh, come on " Harry said.

While the galley door was open I had a brief impression of the outside world above: blue light in the sky, people loitering nearby. I craned my neck to see, and it slammed shut with a shudder. The cooler air prickled on my sweaty face.

"He's always like that," Harry said. "Tarlington. We're sharing quarters, and why he can't just sleep in his precious laboratory, instead of coming in and out at all hours "

"Our biologist," Macready said to me. "Chief scientific officer, if you please, even if it's because he's the only scientific officer. He gets a nice cosy little lab all to himself, when the rest of us are crammed in nose to nose. Some aren't too happy."

I fanned myself. Randall was our last great explorer, heading South for glory. Of course it went without saying any Antarctic expedition would have scientists. Meteorologists, to measure the polar winds; physicists, to chart the magnetic fields; geologists, to dig up what lay under the ice. But my brothers would have seen them as an irrelevance: would have focused on the brilliant expanse of the horizon. The fox-haired man Tarlington was also an irrelevance.

Taking up space, perhaps, meant for someone else. Someone bolder.

"It doesn't surprise me that he's taken against you," Macready said. "He doesn't exactly seem pleased to be with us Randall practically had to beg him. But the others well."

A prickle of unease. The idea of Randall begging anyone seemed preposterous. And I'd hoped the men of the expedition would see me as daring. Audacious. An adventurer. But a skinny scientist only a few years my senior had just looked me up and down like a specimen ready for dissection. It was a poor start.

The galley door swung open again, and my breath caught in my throat.

The man in the doorway was bigger than the frame. Six feet tall and broad in the shoulders, I knew him immediately: Liam Clarke, Randall's most loyal second-in-command. He'd survived a night on the ice with no tent, just a cave burrowed out with his hands and a tin-can shovel, keeping up his strength by gnawing raw frozen meat. I could hardly believe I was seeing him in person. I found my eyes drawn to the tan leather glove on his right hand. Neat little stumps, where frostbite had gnawed away at him; the armed forces had turned him down, and Randall had been criticised for taking a man missing his fingers.

"Get up," he said. "Randall will have you now."

A sudden sickening sensation, as though the ship had plunged beneath me.

Macready gave me a sympathetic look as I stumbled to my feet. I pulled Francis's scarf tighter around my neck; partly to give my hands something to do, partly for reassurance. After my first steps away from home taking what I could carry, leaving no explanations this would be my most terrible test.

"Jonathan," Harry whispered. It sounded an awful lot like he wanted to apologise. I shot him a scathing look.

I watched myself on the steps, dreading the spectacle if I fell over again. At the top, a scattering of men dispersed at some speed when Clarke looked their way. It was a curious time of day nearly ten o'clock at night, with the southern sun still shining and the sky was a deep cyan blue, untroubled by clouds. I felt like a prisoner on his way to the gallows.

Conscious it might be my only chance, I drank in the Fortitude. After so long below, she had a feeling of openness, endless possibility, although she was a small three-masted ship, one hundred and seventy feet long, carrying half sail. At her bow end was the galley. At the stern, the large black funnel of the engine. And in between, the bridge the ship's wheel, the bell I'd heard so many times raised up on steps with fine brass banisters. The forbidding doors of the wardroom ahead. Hatches disappeared into the deck, and fist-size glass illuminators, wearing brass hats like toadstools, caught the sun and filtered it down to her secret layers below. Boats hung over the side; ropes; winches; items I scarcely recognised.

She was beautiful, full of harmonies in her shape, her gilding and burnished timbers glimmering in the light.

There were men, too, crowding the decks everywhere I turned. The ship's carpenter, wearing a beaten tool belt, was braiding rope into something that looked like a hammock, and winked at me as I walked past. A remarkably dashing-looking man presumably Duncan pulled dog harnesses from a locker, swore at the tangles, then glared at us.

Behind, perched above the galley stove vents, was Harry's domain: the dog deck. They must have caught our scent as the wind shifted, because there was an explosion of furious barking, and Harry shouted, "Quiet, there " before remembering his place in our gallows procession. Someone chuckled. It had a mean sound to it.


THE WARD-ROOM DOOR WAS SO LOW THAT CLARKE HAD to stoop. Down a flight of stairs, it wasn't a large room: the officers' cabins crammed the walls, names neatly stencilled in navy on their sliding doors. Those illuminators let in shafts of light from the deck above, shining off the rich polished woodwork. On a different ship I'd have expected a piano; here, everything was functional, right down to the laundry drying in front of the stove, fogging up the great gold-framed mirror.

This informality extended to the scene itself. When I'd imagined it, I'd always pictured Randall behind a desk, as if holding a court-martial, but the long table was pushed to the far end of the room, covered in charts: he was sitting on it instead. A man in his late thirties, salt-and-pepper curls escaping a knitted cap, was sketching something energetically in lurid red ink. Randall nodded, rubbed his chin. Two other officers fell silent at my entrance.

The ship rocked from side to side, making me feel sick. My first impulse was to go to my knees. To look down. To take up less space. I quashed it.

Randall cleared his throat, then looked at me with a steady, unblinking gaze. He was far less handsome than in the papers, and a little shorter. Frostbite had left its mark: much of his left eyebrow was missing, and that side of his face looked roughly sanded down. His nose was slightly out of joint, wide jaw set askew. His waistcoat was a few inches too small, his sleeves dirty.

The whole country knew him. I opened my mouth and closed it again.

Zero hour.

"Ah," Randall said. "Fresh eyes, just what we need." His voice was low, with a growl to it. "Nicholls here, our navigator " he indicated the man with the knitted cap "plots an easterly course. Says we should aim to make an early landfall to the northeast Coats Land."

The room fell silent. A clock ticked. The chairs squeaked as they rocked absently on their bearings. My breathing sounded terribly loud.

Nicholls glanced at Clarke behind me. "I'm only saying we should avoid the worst of the Weddell Sea pack. They'd tell you the same in Grytviken. Whalers don't risk damage to company boats."

Randall raised his eyebrows. One of them lifted, the other on the frozen side of his face seemed to deepen into a scowl. "And waste time we could use getting further south?"

"We don't know the condition of the coast down there. If we end up having to overwinter in the ice "

"She's sheathed in three foot of greenheart, and won't be breached," another man said. He wore a smart naval cap and epaulettes, stood perfectly straight: I knew he must be Mortimer, the ship's captain. "But if we can't find safe harbour south, we would certainly be frozen into the pack. No; February is our only window of opportunity to penetrate the Weddell Sea."

"There's no knowing when we'd ever get out again why would you risk it "

Randall silenced them, making a chopping motion with his hand.

"What do our new crew members think?" He heaved himself off the table and walked towards us with a rolling gait, as if he, too, were under sail. "Eh? You two? Slow and cautious or full steam into the pack?"

Harry shuffled his feet behind me. I crossed my arms realised how confrontational this looked uncrossed them again.

Randall paused. "Of course, you'll have an opinion," he said. "Bright young adventurers like you."

The ship dipped a little, and my stomach lurched. I caught a hiss of breath from the assembled officers; Randall's dark blue eyes on me were too bright, fever-keen.

The worst of it was, I did have an opinion. I'd listened to my brothers, up in their treehouse, using the atlas to trace the route down from Buenos Aires. Francis, luxuriating in the sun, would make suggestions about the ocean currents and drift. The roundabout way, that was his nature. Rufus, of course, always favoured the direct assault. And Harry had to pick a side usually ended up pleasing no one.

"Well?" Randall growled, pushing me in the chest with one large hand just above my breastbone. The force of it made me stumble, my breath catch Randall, Australis Randall, was touching me. Up close, he smelled of salt and tobacco, and I found myself wanting to take a step back. I stared at the ruined side of his face. No other man had fallen into the Weddell Sea and lived. All appearance of jovial interest had now gone.

I thought of Rufus. So bold. Always so direct. My brothers would have fought for this: I would do the same.

Randall pushed me again. I planted my feet. It was like being pawed by a large vengeful animal.

"Sir," I said, meeting his terrible eye, and deepening my voice. "Jonathan Morgan. I think "

"You think," Randall said. "You think. You don't know, though, do you? You know nothing about these waters, or the pack. Might as well have looked at a bloody map. You've never been South. You've never been out of the nursery, to look at you, eh?"

A large hand closed around my jaw. I forced myself not to flinch. Bones ground under his grip, and I was grateful for the scarf pulled tight around my neck.

"Tall enough," he said, as if looking at an uninspiring racecourse prospect. "Well-fed, at least useful for a spare. You lot?"

Clarke snorted. The men around us suddenly looked like explorers: the sort of faces I'd seen in the papers. Bright, sharp eyes, a brutal set to the jaw. Capable hands. Scars. Beards. I fell short in every possible way.

"Cooper's the one to blame," said a man with the largest arms I'd ever seen. I recognised his voice from the galley angry, informal. Boyd. He was nothing like I'd imagined, scowl lines on his forehead so pronounced they looked like tide patterns in sand. "He joined up under false pretences to land us with this."

"They should both be turned off at South Georgia." Mortimer stroked the smooth wood of the mainmast, which ran through the wardroom from ceiling to floor, as if soothing the ship against our offence.

Nicholls shrugged. His voice the voice I'd heard through my prison walls was mild, pleasant. "We're more than a man short already. There's room."

Randall barked with laughter. "A man short, eh?"

He pressed the heel of his hand to my collarbone, and released me. I could barely feel it. There was a ringing in my ears, like an air-raid siren. "We had some like you," he said conversationally. "In my battalion. Young lads, thought they'd be heroes."

Boyd smirked. "So young they barely made a mouthful for the Boche."

My stomach turned. I thought I was going to be sick. The room was suddenly too crowded, too dark, too enclosed. As if I were being put back in my box; something found wanting, and discarded.

"Well?" Randall looked at me expectantly. I surprised myself by putting my hands up to fend him off: I wouldn't be shoved again. Surprised him, too a flash of interest lit up those blue searchlight eyes.

Harry saved me from making a fool of myself. "Sir, I take full responsibility."

"Really?" Randall said, rocking back on his heels. "He was unwilling, was he? You tied him up and bundled him aboard, and he's been in our galley locker for days trying to what gnaw his way out?"

Harry flushed. "I'm the one you accepted "

"And that was a mistake," Boyd muttered.

"Boyd is right," Harry said, perfectly wretched. "I've misled you. It was my decision to bring him on board, and if anyone should be punished "

"I should punish both of you."

"I know that," Harry said. "I only ask that you consider "

Randall looked at him, face darkening. Storm clouds moving across the water.

"I will consider, Cooper," he said, voice coming to a roar, "what I damn well like!" He shoved past me and advanced on Harry. "This is my ship! My men! Who have entrusted me with their lives, at sea and on the ice and in all the bloody spaces in between! We're provisioned for twenty-three of us to survive eighteen months, right down to the last allowance of biscuits. Every step of the way I'll be charged with your lives and ends decisions you couldn't possibly understand! If I misjudge the pack, we'll be crushed into smithereens and drown. If I take too long, we'll starve. And you presume "

Harry shook his head, his throat bobbing. "No."

"Don't interrupt me, damn you! And as for you . . ."

Randall's gaze swept to me, and this time I did take a step back.

"D'you know," he said, "I won't have it! We'll split you up confine you separately. Well? If this were wartime, with the threat of sabotage, someone sneaking aboard like a common criminal or a spy by God you're lucky you weren't shot! Boyd search the stowaway, thoroughly. Strip him on deck if you like. Deal with him as you think fit, until South Georgia, when we'll throw them both out."

The wardroom danced about in my vision. The door seemed a long way above me. Clarke put a large hand on my shoulder.

"Don't touch him!" Harry wheeled around, throwing a punch that went mercifully wide. A small, choked sound as he realised what he'd done. For Harry, discipline was something sacred.

"Do not " Randall growled; Clarke caught Harry's arm and twisted it up against his back, pulling him away from me like a rag doll.

"I'll deal with this," Clarke said grimly.

"Let him go," Randall said. Clarke shook his head. Randall repeated it, low and dangerous. Behind us, a squeaking of chairs as the other officers got up. I could hear Harry's unsteady breathing. I stood frozen. My mind stuttered, reeled, at strip him on deck.

Randall seized Harry by his collar; Clarke let go. Then Randall was dragging Harry up the stairs and onto deck. We were separated. The wardroom door slammed resoundingly behind them, and I was left in the dim light inside.

The moment stretched out. A shout outside made me jump, nearly overturning the hanging laundry, and my heart thudded. It was Harry, in fear or pain or surprise. Nicholls said, urgently, "Well?"

I bolted for the door.

Outside, clouds were scudding across the sky, canvas billowing. I looked around wildly, seeing immediately that none of the crew would help us. Clarke held Randall, fighting to keep his weight on deck, the muscles in his neck standing taut. Randall, in turn, was holding Harry over the side of the ship: over the railings, facedown, so far over that a single slip would have been his last. We were making a good pace under sail, and the crash of waves against the hull was loud as thunder.

I made two strides before someone grabbed me tightly around the waist, saying "No" into my ear. I clamped my hands to my mouth to stop myself screaming.

"My crew," Randall shouted, booming up and down deck. "My men, Cooper, not that it means anything to you. Their lives your worthless little life! Good God, if I see you raise so much as a finger if I hear another goddamn out of you, when it's not wanted I'll tear it up, you hear me. I won't take a penny, I'll go bankrupt, and throw you to the whalers you little "

"Australis " Clarke said.

The wind was picking up, whipping Harry's curls, plucking at his shirt. He wasn't fighting back. It would be like expecting him to strike God himself.

The ship creaked ominously, as if Randall had commanded the turn in the weather. A small gesture from Mortimer sent men into the rigging. I pulled away from my captor slipped, going to my knees scrambled to right myself like an overturned beetle.

My mouth was dry. I wanted to call out to Harry; something wordless, bubbling up inside me with guilt and fear. I wanted to say I was sorry for all the secret meetings and pleading that had brought us here. Walks on the quayside, trading anecdotes like particularly prized cigarette cards; matching his pace, trying to keep up with him. His hair was plastered damp against his neck, and I swallowed thickly, thinking of the long drop over the side, the plummeting horror before he hit the water, the green swell of it smacking him in the face. How he'd thrash. How he'd scream. How he would slip into the deep, leaving me behind.

Not Harry, too. I couldn't bear it.

The wind crackled and popped in the sails. My breath hitched. "It was my idea!" I shouted. Then, lower: "Randall sir "

Randall half-turned, keeping Harry pinned against the railings, all that violent attention now fixed on me. "Well?"

"It was my idea," I said. "I made him bring me."

"Australis!" Clarke said again. Randall grudgingly hauled Harry back on deck, boots first, and let him go, limp as a fish pulled from water.

Randall wiped his hands on his trousers. Took two large paces to come to me, so close I could feel his breath on my face. I bit the inside of my cheek until I tasted blood.

"Well Morgan. You and me."

I felt the air reenter my lungs.

Clarke held up his hand, giving Randall a warning look. "Not a democracy," Randall said, and pulled me into the wardroom by my collar, my legs stuttering beneath me on the stairs.

When the door slammed shut, leaving us alone in the sudden warmth, Randall took up all the space in the room. Looming over me, swaying with the ship. "You've got one chance. By God, I'd throw you both overboard now."

I put my quivering hands behind my back; pressed torn nails into my palms; took a deep breath. "A chance is all I want sir. I've put the rest of your crew in danger. I know that now. I'll be punished, just please keep me on. Let me see Antarctica. Let me see the shores just the pack and you can do what you like with me."

It wasn't enough. The clock ticked away, the mirror winked behind him; Randall continued to stare at me, utterly impassive. I hadn't prepared a speech, like Harry. I'd been so sure I'd know what to say when the time came.

"Sir," I said desperately. "My brothers." It stuck in my throat, like a solid lump. "They were a little older than me twenty-one and twenty-two, when they died. They'd applied for their commissions straight off, the moment it all started, because they thought it'd be an adventure. And they meant to join your next expedition, too. It was all they talked about. The South Pole was all they wanted. And then when they didn't come back I knew I had to come instead."

There was a long, terrible silence, and I tried to moisten my dry lips under the weight of that stare. Randall turned his signet ring around and around on his finger. His family motto: Fortitude or Devastation.

"And Cooper? Where does he come in?"

"He was over there with them. At the Front." My chest tightened. "Their best friend a family friend. I knew he wouldn't leave me behind."

My voice was trembling. As the ring gleamed in the dying light, I hoped I wasn't overdoing it. Randall had nearly thrown Harry over the side he wouldn't hesitate to punch me, and one blow from those bearlike hands would knock me out. But I'd staked a great deal on the notion that he wouldn't stand someone being left behind like Charlie Randall, abandoned by his regiment, missing presumed dead. Perhaps he'd ended up trapped in a shell hole, showers of earth and stone until the mud buried him alive. Perhaps he'd been left by the side of a dusty winding road, begging for water, waiting for a stretcher-bearer that would never come. Harry would never have abandoned a Morgan, and I was the last one left.

Some said the loss at the Somme of his only son had broken Randall; others muttered you wouldn't know the difference. He seemed to have frozen, one hand steadying himself against a beam, his reflection looming in the mirror.

"How'd you do it?"

I jumped. Clarke had perched himself at the top of the stairs.

"We bribed the nightwatchman." A pause, in which he clearly expected more details. "Sneaked away from from our houses in England, then crossed the Channel, took a liner to Madeira." That was the last time we'd really had to worry about names and documentation: it had felt like we were moving in leaps and bounds, each one getting a little bigger, a little further, picking up pace. "Then packet ship fast packet to Buenos Aires." I glanced uneasily at Randall. "You'd said Harry would have a place. So we used his funds. All of them."

Clarke nodded, slowly. I could see him assessing me. I had the distinct impression he could tell I must have run away from home that I'd left without giving my parents even the slightest hint where I was going. Doubtless they would guess Harry and I were together. When the War had broken out, our social circle had seen a flurry of hasty engagements elopements. They could draw whatever misguided conclusions they liked, if only they didn't try to stop me.

"You said it was your idea?"

I nodded. It had taken time and patience, but I could remember the first sign of Harry's surrender. It felt incongruous in the heart of the Fortitude to recall that seaside tearoom. The owner had found excuses to adjust our tablecloth every few moments, looking as though she were chewing on a bee: it was inappropriate for Harry and I to be out together, no matter how people's views might be changing since the War. I remembered Harry's large hands wrapped around a china teacup; how he'd reached across the table when I told him I'd have traded myself for my brothers, if I could.

The Fortitude creaked. I flinched when Randall moved suddenly, releasing the beam above my head, shifting his weight back with a rocking motion to fix me again with that terrible gaze.

"Let me stay." I shivered, feeling Clarke's eyes on the back of my neck. "Please. I'll prove to you that I'm worth it. That I'd be as good as my brothers."

"Well." It sounded dredged up from somewhere deep. "I don't like being kept in the dark. But that boy would throw a punch for you and at Liam Clarke, no less! I suppose you come as a pair eh?"

I knew what I was meant to say, the sort of thing he'd like to hear: that we'd promised to stick together, like boys in a public-school story. But a traitorous part of me could almost taste my success. One Morgan, at least, would see the ice, and damn the consequences: it was the sort of thing Rufus would say. A shiver ran down my spine. I'd seen how utterly lost Harry had looked. How small, without them.

Randall stared at me for a moment, then turned away. "Well, we'll see how you stack up by South Georgia," he said over his shoulder. "The two of you together barely add up to one expedition man. No complaining, d'you hear me? Not a peep. We'll enter you into the ship's book as a stowaway, or spare I suppose you know what happens to spares when times get hard?"

I didn't ask. There was a cruel look about him.

I nearly ran out of the wardroom. The crew were going about their business on deck, turning in for the night as if nothing had happened; as if Randall threatened to murder someone every day.

"Harry," I whispered, an uncertain smile starting to pull at my mouth. "Harry!"

"Wait!" Standing in the doorway, Randall was a bulky shape in the shadows: some rough thing, shoved into man's clothing. "Your brothers heard the call of the South. They're dead and gone, you'll not see them again it's your own life at stake. Is this what you want, Morgan?"

I'd spent hours staring at that map of Antarctica, at the white space in its centre. Uncharted. Unconfined. As wholly perfect as a blank page.

I wanted so much. To take their place, on the ship and on the ice. To follow where they led. And on the deck of the Fortitude, the wind in her sails, as I faced Australis Randall they might as well have been beside me.

I nodded. "It's all I want," I said truthfully. "Sir."


"ANOTHER ONE FOR THE NURSERY," NICHOLLS SAID cheerfully, ducking through the maze of beams and compartments that made up the Fortitude's main deck. Although he had both hands full, he navigated it with ease, pushing through a succession of doors far into the depths of the ship: down into the galley, then the mess hall, then another corridor. With each compartment, the sound of the wind receded further.

I was tripping over my feet, trying to look at everything at once, urgently hoping I'd learn the path to the latrines through this warren. We passed a row of communal basins, surrounded by curtains, a man lathering up his chin with an enormous badger brush; shelves of leather-bound books, storm lanterns and galoshes hanging below, every square inch of space in use. A cabin marked "The Coal Hole," where a short man perched on an upper bunk and polished his boots. Finally, a small cubbyhole with bottles on the walls and a microscope on the table, Tarlington staring into it with a tightness to his back that made me utterly sure he was aware of our passage behind him.

"Oh, stop it " Harry said when I stumbled, and grabbed my shoulder to march me into a small room marked "The Nursery." The walls were curved where wood panelling covered her bones; despite the Fortitude being double-walled Norwegian fir and greenheart, I found myself listening for the sea outside. There were only two bunks. One was made up neatly. The other, with a bunched blanket and a pair of abandoned waterproofs, I knew at once to be Harry's.

"You'll be sick at first," Nicholls said, beginning to string up a hammock the hammock, I now understood, I'd seen the ship's carpenter making for me. I fought down a smile. "You think you've got used to it but now you'll be going in the opposite direction when she rolls, and you'll be sicker than you ever thought possible."

I looked around. The cabin was barely six feet across, a small latch on the door. When Tarlington stood in the connecting door to his laboratory, fiddling with a handkerchief and wearing a scowl, it felt even smaller. It was perfect. I imagined my brothers heaving their packs onto the bunks, shouldering off their coats.

"I don't mind," I said quickly.

"You'll have to look after him," Nicholls said.

Harry bristled. "Of course I will."

Nicholls chuckled, lines crinkling around his eyes. "All right, then. Get settled in. Best show yourself for cocoa, once you've changed those clothes."

He was right, of course: that night I leant over the side of the hammock, retching into a pail. The room was claustrophobic and dark, and I could hear men snoring down the corridor in the mess hall. Harry made restless noises in his sleep; Tarlington hissed, "Will you be quiet!" It was nothing like my bed at home, fresh linen and silk-smooth sheets. I lay with my eyes half-open, dozing, as the ship swayed around me. I couldn't help smiling until my face hurt.

It was a start.


I HAD NEVER NEEDED MUCH SLEEP, BUT THE DAYS THAT followed were designed, with brutal efficiency, to push me to my limits. The sun shone relentlessly, casting me into a strange world in which time held no meaning. The ship rolled, pitched, took me off balance. "Get Morgan a bucket" became a joke at least, I hoped it was a joke amongst the seamen who clattered up and down the decks teasing Harry about his reluctant charges; dog-skin mittens; dog-meat sandwiches. The work was constant, broken only by meals snatched on deck with Harry perched beside me like a sentry; I loitered outside the mess hall sometimes, but didn't quite dare go in.

On the second day Harry lent me a hand scrubbing the crew WC a small closet next to that row of basins, it thankfully had a latch on the door until Clarke strode in and pulled him up by his collar. "What do you think you're doing?"

Harry squirmed, looking around for support. "I was only "

"You've got work of your own to worry about," Clarke said, his voice soft. "He needs to earn his own way, or he'll remain just a spare."

"I am " I started hotly, but Clarke had already gone. After that, Clarke did his best to break us up, although he said little. He wouldn't easily forgive my intrusion onto his Randall's expedition. I was certain he knew I'd run away; it was dizzying to think that this was the first time I'd even left home. I'd been meant for boarding school, around the time my brothers were finally being sent to the Front: another way in which my parents hoped to make me different, more appropriate. I'd dreaded the very thought of it, some entirely foreign and female country, from which somehow I'd never expected to return. Francis had sat on the end of my bed, on the lavender chintz I'd always hated, and put his arm around me. "Some prissy boarding school I'm not going to let them. Don't you worry, my dear Jo."

He'd kept his promise but failed to return himself.

On the Fortitude, I'd expected to wear his scarf like armour, like a signal flag, but when I'd first reported to the sailing master for duty in the rigging, Wild had taken one look at me and said cheerfully: "D'you want to strangle, then?"

And later "Like a monkey, that Morgan!"

I'd always loved climbing the treehouse, my brothers' treehouse, was my favourite place in the world. Back in Portsmouth those pin-tucked blouses had welded my arms to my sides, long, dull day-dresses had to be kept clean worse than that, climbing was another thing that was inappropriate, and Rufus would always shout at me to get back down. Then in the next moment I'd be expected to hide his own boyish transgressions, whenever my mother was in a flap over bootprints on carpet, or my father thundered at an evening spent somewhere out of bounds to young gentlemen. A finger pressed to Rufus's Cupid's bow lips, his gaze lingering, would thrill me with its complicity its promise that we were on the same side. The same team.

Here in my new trousers, however, I was finally free. Standing as I'd been meant to, taking wider strides as I'd been meant to climbing as I'd been meant to. No one would tell me to get down, not any more. From up on the yards the spars of the ship's three masts the Fortitude was small, and I was a giant, laughing at the motion of the waves, the speed of our swooping progress.

But by my third day out of the locker, every muscle in my body ached. My armpits felt tight, and I'd grown iron wings on my shoulder blades. Letting out a deep sigh when I came down from the rigging for the final time, I hugged the mast, sinking my weight into it. I longed to lie down, or soak my sore hands and feet in warmish water, but Clarke as usual, refusing to look directly at me said, "You're wanted back on deck, so snatch something to eat, and report."

It was a little after eleven o'clock, but the perpetual twilight still shone white-and-grey. The ship was settling down for the night: galley stove cooling in a series of muffled bangs, lights coming on in the wardroom and glimmering up onto deck. We'd been making good progress through an uncharacteristically calm sea, but freezing mist had rolled in, and all sails had been reefed. The air wrapped me up in a wet cloak; I could barely see from port to starboard. The ship hung suspended in dark water.

The nightwatchman on the bridge was Boyd: big arms, no-nonsense moustache. He was Randall's first officer, and would gladly have flogged or caned me if Randall had ordered him to do so, regulations be damned. His knotted knuckles popped as he took the steaming mug of coffee.

"Dog deck," he said, having a gulp then scowling. "Needs a scrub."

"Yes, sir." It came out automatically: I never needed to think about saying "yes" to everything. But the dog deck had been scrubbed by Harry that morning. Boyd had been about, barking orders at the seamen, getting in their way or so it appeared to my untrained eye and must surely have seen so.

Boyd shrugged, giving me a look that might just pass for a smile. "There's no use shirking," he said, mistaking my pause for reluctance. "Clarke's compliments. The fog will make the bastards sleep, at least." His language spoke of the Front it seemed to cling to him. Sugar and condensed milk were in ample supply, but he insisted on taking his coffee black: Good enough in the lines, he said proudly, and good enough here.

I'd tried it a few times; it tasted like mud to me. If I'd thought to appeal to Boyd, I didn't have the slightest notion how to go about it.

Although the dog deck had a clear line of sight to the bridge, once I went up the steps the fog engulfed him entirely. I recognised that it was the first time I'd been so alone on deck. The Fortitude was small, and I was forever turning a corner headfirst into someone, being barged and shoved as I made my way below. I exhaled a long, deep breath, feeling my chest expanding. It was clearly the first time I'd been trusted: I tried to recall how Clarke had looked, but only came up with the impression of his size, and silence. If this were progress, it hadn't shown.

I smiled as I turned to work. The dogs seemed to be obeying Boyd in their stillness, and I was glad, thinking of all the scars and torn sleeves I'd seen on Harry. "Brutes," he'd say, with a rueful sigh. It was true he had no real experience with dogs: with my encouragement, he'd told some absolute rot about hunting, implied he spent weekends in the country, which was good enough for Randall, who'd said jovially, "Well, I suppose you'll be a dogsbody then, eh?" That lie, and nearly a thousand pounds in funds, had bought Harry his place. We hadn't been able to believe our luck.

But I'd egged him on only because I'd known he would come good: Harry had a knack for picking things up, and there'd be plenty of time before the dog teams were needed on the ice.

For now, our dogs slept or quarrelled in an unpredictable rota, largely housed in a horseshoe of kennels between the dog-deck steps and the prow. The smallest mongrel Jamieson made a few groaning whimpers as I knelt outside his hutch, fingers already numb around the scrubbing brush. The night had a bite to it, and the fog settling on my face seemed to beckon from the frozen Weddell Sea.

I worked silently and diligently, determined not to shirk: if Boyd came up to check, he would find me hard at it. Shuffling on my knees down the deck, the rest of the ship became invisible. The fog simply cut it off at the steps, where I could have walked down into nothingness. The angular crosses of the foremast yards, naked of sail, loomed at the very limits of sight. The sun bobbing low along the horizon had been taken up, and the world was white.

I started to hum; fell silent after the first few notes, telling myself I didn't want to wake the dogs. When one turned over in its sleep tail thumping against the kennel the sound sent a shiver right through me. I paused, listening hard.

Muffled by the fog: Boyd ringing the ship's bell. It sounded like it had come from the dark water outside, a drowned city still ringing its church bells. I straightened up, rolling my aching shoulders back, telling myself it was nothing.

I didn't look around until the deck was fresh and glistening, prevented from freezing over by the faint warmth of the galley below. My lantern was a small pool of light, ending at the railings, the barriers between the ship and the vastness of the sea around us. The foremast was gone.

The fog was advancing on me.

I sat on my heels, listening again for the sounds of the ship. Timber creaked. The long steady breathing of the dogs was absurdly comforting. I tugged my hat down lower, jammed my hands under my armpits.

Jamieson made that whining sound again, high-pitched and mournful. It made all the hairs lift on the back of my neck. The visible world around me was small, and I had a sudden dread of leaving the dog deck, fumbling down the steps into the unknown. I stayed silent. I told myself not to be afraid: this was simply the first in a succession of even stranger nights to come.

A slow scraping noise just below me. The dogs stirred. One growled, drawn-out and watchful.

Boyd couldn't possibly have left the bridge; we were the only ones on deck. My heart hammered, and I crept forward on hands and knees, still clutching my brush.

The steps were solid in all that nothingness. True visibility ended at the third step down. A lantern glimmered below me, Jamieson continuing to make small warning sounds. In the half-light I could see my breaths, small and erratic, blending with the fog.

Then, on the deck beneath me, almost floating in the whiteness: a tall red-haired figure, wearing a long coat, hands thrust deep into his pockets.

My throat closed up. The figure seemed in the act of dissolving, and I dropped the brush. Opened my mouth to speak to him. He'd come back. He'd returned to me.

Francis.

He was floating, like the uniforms my mother had hung up in the hallway, looming over the sour-smelling cut flowers. They'd come back to us in linen drawstring bags, neatly pressed: my brothers' personal effects. Little nicks and holes, ragged sleeves, and one horrible area of tearing on each tunic, as though savaged by a wild animal. I'd dared to put my fingers into the holes, reaching through to absence.

The scraping noise came again; I saw the shallow door of the foredeck locker open. A broad shadow came out, moving with confidence on the slippery deck, and walked away swiftly, footsteps muffled.

The ghostly figure that remained suddenly became Tarlington, standing in the fog, his greatcoat undone despite the night's chill. He didn't turn around. I ducked behind the railings, pressing my hands to my chest, feeling dizzy.

When I could breathe again, I retrieved my bucket. It clanked and jangled as I hauled it down the steps, but the spell whatever it was had been broken. The water from the pump was like pure burning fire on my fingertips, and I flexed them hastily to restore circulation. "Again," Boyd said, coming up to cast a jaundiced eye over my handiwork, when I'd thought I was more than done. He didn't give the slightest sign that I'd impressed him.

I had the rest of the watch, surrounded by the quiet warm sounds of dogs in sleep, to wonder what two people would want in the foredeck locker, when the rest of the crew was below. All was in order: I'd held my breath as I opened the locker door, almost expecting something to come out. But it was low-ceilinged and unremarkable, filled with coiled ropes and washy with rainwater. No dredging nets, no part-dissected seabirds, nothing at all to do with science. It was after midnight, the foggy sky starting to reveal a grey morning, and Tarlington had no possible business there.

Tarlington was described as our biologist, but I'd picked up how very young he was: barely older than Harry, he could have no experience, couldn't even have finished his undergraduate degree. If Randall needed a bone to toss to the old men of the Royal Geographical Society, for funding or forbearance, Tarlington was surely the skinniest bone he could find an interested amateur at best. But he was still entitled to order the men around, and had the run of the ship. Which, now I thought of it, had extended to my own hiding place; the darkness of the storage locker.

I shivered, closing the door with a muffled bang.

When Harry came to relieve me, yawning and waking the dogs with his clumsy footing on the steps, I didn't mention any of it. I resented the way my childish heart had pounded, the fact that my imagination had made Francis from thin air. The fog and isolation had spooked me. They're dead and gone, you'll not see them again.